---
title: "Rust <3"
layout: post
categories: blog
tags: [rust]
---

This is my second approach to learn Rust and I think now I am starting to get it. That is I am starting to really like Rust.

# The good
## Cargo
Cargo is great. Simply great. It might actually start a new [cult](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cargo_cult).

## `null` is dead! Long live `Option`!
I really like that there is no `null` in Rust. When a value can be missing then one has to use [`Option`](https://doc.rust-lang.org/stable/std/option/index.html). It makes the code more explicit because one has to "unpack" the real value which forces to perform the null check (a bit similar to how nullability is made explicit in Kotlin).

## Pattern Matching and Enums
What makes `Option` (and `Result`) such a great solution is how Rust does pattern matching and enums. [Go read about it!](https://doc.rust-lang.org/book/second-edition/ch06-00-enums.html)

## Type conversions
Another great thing about Rust. It does not have type conversions on the language level, instead it has them implemented in standard library as [`Into`](https://doc.rust-lang.org/std/convert/trait.Into.html) and [`From`](https://doc.rust-lang.org/std/convert/trait.From.html) traits.

One implements `From` for new types to mark as they can be created from given _things_ aka _values of this type can be created __From__ X, Y, Z_.

And then uses `Into` either as a type for function arguments (_this function accepts all types that can be converted __Into__ X_) or calls `.into()` when passing an argument to _make it __Into__ what the function accepts_.

## Minimal language
As with the type conversions, the language is kept really small. For example it doesn't have random number generation! It used to be a part of standard library but was deprecated and then removed. Now it lives in a [crate](https://crates.io/crates/rand). 

# The bad
Rust is hard and I mean hard. I have been programming more than a half of my life and using some crazy languages but programming in Rust brings me back to the beginnings.

That said it is getting better. Compiler is a friend and tries to help (and not just vomits pages of resolved templates). It actually has a page for each error with explanation what might have caused it and how to potentially fix it - teaching you Rust as you go.

# The ugly
The borrow checker again. Take a look at this code. Nothing suspicious right?
```rust
fn main() {
    let mut vec = vec![1, 2, 3];
    vec.push(vec.len());
}
```

Well, let's give it a go:
```
$ rustc double_borrow.rs
error[E0502]: cannot borrow `vec` as immutable because it is also borrowed as mutable
 --> double_borrow.rs:3:14
  |
3 |     vec.push(vec.len());
  |     ---      ^^^      - mutable borrow ends here
  |     |        |
  |     |        immutable borrow occurs here
  |     mutable borrow occurs here

error: aborting due to previous error
```
BOOM!

`push` is actually[*](https://doc.rust-lang.org/std/vec/struct.Vec.html#method.push):
```rust
pub fn push(&mut self, value: T)
```
So first there is a `&mut` borrow on `vec` to evaluate first argument and then another `&` borrow for calling `len` on the same `vec`. Mutable and immutable borrows at the same time - that's a no-no in Rust land.

To fix this one can structure the code like this:
```rust
fn main() {
    let mut vec = vec![1, 2, 3];
    let len = vec.len();
    vec.push(len);
}
```
So the length is stored in a temporary variable and there is only one borrow at a time.

But why stop here? If you find yourself using this kind of construct all the time then you can use some other Rust magic. Another, more creative, solution would be to give each type a super power of pushing itself into a vector:
```rust
trait PushInto<T> {
    fn push_into(self, v: &mut Vec<T>);
}

impl <T> PushInto<T> for T {
    fn push_into(self, v: &mut Vec<T>) {
        v.push(self)
    }
}

fn main() {
    let mut vec = vec![1, 2, 3];
    vec.len().push_into(&mut vec);
}
```
Again only one borrow is done at a time.

It is not that bad as it sounds. The compiler is getting smarter and in Rust 2018 the first version of the code compiles without problems.
